
# Using FPGA Cross-Language Libraries
This FPGA tutorial demonstrates how to build DPC++ device libraries from various sources and use them in your DPC++ design. 

***Documentation***: The [oneAPI DPC++ FPGA Optimization Guide](https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-fpga-optimization-guide)  provides comprehensive instructions for targeting FPGAs through DPC++. The [oneAPI Programming Guide](https://software.intel.com/en-us/oneapi-programming-guide) is a general resource for target-independent DPC++ programming. 

| Optimized for                     | Description
---                                 |---
| OS                                | Linux* Ubuntu* 18.04
| Hardware                          | Intel® Programmable Acceleration Card (PAC) with Intel Arria® 10 GX FPGA; <br> Intel® Programmable Acceleration Card (PAC) with Intel Stratix® 10 SX FPGA
| Software                          | Intel® oneAPI DPC++ Compiler (Beta) <br> Intel® FPGA Add-On for oneAPI Base Toolkit 
| What you will learn               | How to create and use libraries in DPC++ FPGA projects <br> How power users can incorporate RTL source code in DPC++ for FPGA
| Time to complete                  | 15 minutes

_Notice: The FPGA library feature is not yet supported in Windows*_

## Purpose
This FPGA tutorial demonstrates how to build DPC++ device libraries from multiple sources and use them in your DPC++ design. A library is useful for reusing and sharing code, or for separating code for testing purposes. Power users can also use libraries to leverage the features of other programming languages in their DPC++ FPGA designs.

It is currently possible to generate FPGA library objects from the following source types:
* Verilog or VHDL (modules or entities respectively)
* Intel® High Level Synthesis Compiler (HLS) functions
* OpenCL* 1.2 functions
* SYCL* or DPC++ functions

This code sample uses libraries from all four supported source types within a single project.

### Generating a library 
To create a library from  source code, use the following steps:

1. `fpga_crossgen` creates object file that contains representations for target devices (FPGA) and FPGA emulator. The following commands instruct `fpga_crossgen` to generate DPC++ target objects from the four sources in this tutorial:
   
   ```
   fpga_crossgen lib_hls.cpp --source hls --target sycl -o lib_hls.o
   fpga_crossgen lib_ocl.cl --source ocl --target sycl -o lib_ocl.o
   fpga_crossgen lib_sycl.cpp --source sycl --target sycl -o lib_sycl.o
   fpga_crossgen lib_rtl_spec.xml --emulation_model lib_rtl_model.cpp --target sycl -o lib_rtl.o
   ```
     Notice that generating an RTL library requires that an `xml` file and emulation model be provided in addition to the Verilog source code. Examine the tutorial source code and the comments in `use_library.cpp` for more details.
2. `fpga_libtool` collects one or more objects into a DPC++ library archive file. This command creates a single library archive file from the four object files generated by `fpga_crossgen` in the previous step:

   ```
   fpga_libtool lib_hls.o lib_ocl.o lib_rtl.o lib_sycl.o --target sycl --create lib.a
   ```
### Using the library
To use the generated library in your project, simply add the generated library archive file to the list of input source files when invoking `dpcpp`. To compile the `use_library` tutorial, pass both `use_library.cpp` and `lib.a` as inputs.
```
# Compile for FPGA emulator
dpcpp -fintelfpga use_library.cpp lib.a -o use_library_emu.fpga -DFPGA_EMULATOR

# Compile for FPGA hardware
dpcpp -fintelfpga use_library.cpp lib.a -o use_library.fpga -Xshardware
```


## Key Concepts
* How to create and use libraries in DPC++ FPGA projects
* How power users can incorporate RTL source code in DPC++ for FPGA

## License  
This code sample is licensed under MIT license.


## Building the `use_library` Tutorial

### Include Files
The included header `dpc_common.hpp` is located at `%ONEAPI_ROOT%\dev-utilities\latest\include` on your development system.

### Running Samples in DevCloud
If running a sample in the Intel DevCloud, remember that you must specify the compute node (fpga_compile or fpga_runtime) as well as whether to run in batch or interactive mode. For more information see the Intel® oneAPI Base Toolkit Get Started Guide ([https://devcloud.intel.com/oneapi/get-started/base-toolkit/](https://devcloud.intel.com/oneapi/get-started/base-toolkit/)).

When compiling for FPGA hardware, it is recommended to increase the job timeout to 12h.

### On a Linux* System

1. Generate the `Makefile` by running `cmake`.
     ```
   mkdir build
   cd build
   ```
   To compile for the Intel® PAC with Intel Arria® 10 GX FPGA, run `cmake` using the command:  
    ```
    cmake ..
   ```
   Alternatively, to compile for the Intel® PAC with Intel Stratix® 10 SX FPGA, run `cmake` using the command:

   ```
   cmake .. -DFPGA_BOARD=intel_s10sx_pac:pac_s10
   ```

2. Compile the design through the generated `Makefile`. The following build targets are provided, matching the recommended development flow:

   * Compile for emulation (fast compile time, targets emulated FPGA device): 
      ```
      make fpga_emu
      ```
   * Generate the optimization report: 
     ```
     make report
     ``` 
   * Compile for FPGA hardware (longer compile time, targets FPGA device): 
     ```
     make fpga
     ``` 
3. (Optional) As the above hardware compile may take several hours to complete, an Intel® PAC with Intel Arria® 10 GX FPGA precompiled binary can be downloaded <a href="https://iotdk.intel.com/fpga-precompiled-binaries/latest/use_library.fpga.tar.gz" download>here</a>.

 ### In Third-Party Integrated Development Environments (IDEs)

You can compile and run this tutorial in the Eclipse* IDE (in Linux*). For instructions, refer to the following link: [Intel® oneAPI DPC++ FPGA Workflows on Third-Party IDEs](https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/intel-oneapi-dpcpp-fpga-workflow-on-ide)


## Running the Sample

 1. Run the sample on the FPGA emulator (the kernel executes on the CPU):
     ```
     ./use_library.fpga_emu     (Linux)
     ```
2. Run the sample on the FPGA device:
     ```
     ./use_library.fpga         (Linux)
     ```

### Example of Output
```
PASSED: result is correct!
```
